% Translating a Digital Quality Measure for Cancer Diagnosis Quality to a Novel Data Source

Andrew J. Zimolzak, Jessica Davila, Hardeep Singh

Due May 2. SIDM scientific abstracts are 400 words (really 2800
characters). Title 100 characters max. Optional: one figure or table
(upload) if abstract is 350 words or less.

# Abstract

Background: Missed and delayed cancer diagnoses are common, harmful,
and often preventable. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
have emphasized digital quality measures (dQMs) that evaluate
longitudinal electronic health record data across multiple settings of
care to address measurement gaps in quality. Therefore, dQMs will be
needed specifically in the cancer diagnosis quality domain, to
identify gaps and guide interventions. We have previously developed a
dQM of the rate of emergency presentation (EP) of cancer. We developed
and validated this measure in two US health systems; here we aimed to
demonstrate its viability and utility in an independent large US data
source.

Methods: We implemented the cancer EP in Cosmos, a deidentified
database covering ________ million individuals. Emergency presentation was
defined as ER visit followed by the new cancer diagnosis within 30
days. The interface is point and click instead of SQL, which required
using the original source document English language description, a
previously published approach that has worked. We measured the rate of
EP nationwide in those with new lung cancer diagnosis in calendar year
2019. We examined previous associations with demographic factors. We
examined associations with social determinants of health both from
survey and census ZIP code level data.

Results: At national scale, the dQM for lung EP was 19.5% (out of
58,274 cancer diagnoses). This is similar to prior values (19% VA and
18% Geisinger). Demographics showed 19% EP in white patients and 24%
in black (the two most common categories). Age < 69 had higher EP
(23%) compared to 78 and above (17%, p<0.001). There was a stepwise
association of more EP with each increasing category of social
vulnerability (18% at lowest category vs. 22% at highest, p<0.001).
Income showed a stepwise decrease in EP with increasing ZIP per capita
income (p < 0.001). Survey data showed an association of EP with
transportation to medical appointments (43% vs. 28%).

Conclusions: We successfully implemented a dQM using a different
platform for US medical record data. We validated previous demographic
associations shown in separate datasets. We showed associations with
social determinants data that were not available elsewhere and can be
further investigated. Limitations include the inability to
definitively re-validate the measure using this specific platform due
to deidentified data and no access to text notes, although this could
be done at any single institution that wanted to implement the
measure.
